             --------------------------
             |      DragonQuest 5     |
             |   English Translation  |
             --------------------------
             |v2.01 Final  23-FEB-2002|
             |------------------------|
             |This translation is FREE|
             | For more info, please  |
             | visit these websites:  |
             |                        |
             | http://dejap.zsnes.com |
             | http://pt.parodius.com |
             --------------------------


I. Story of DragonQuest 5

Excerpt from the DragonQuest 5 manual:
------------------------------------------------------
He has traveled through  the  world  with  his  father
ever since he was a  little  boy.  He  is  your  other
self, the form of  the  hero.  As  a  little  boy,  he
will meet lots of people  and  is  sure  to  have  all
kinds of  adventurous  experiences, always  continuing
on his journey. However, the path will not  always  be
easy, but in time, he will grow into  a  sturdy  youth.
Later on his journey, he will meet the Monster  Gramps,
and a sacred power hidden within him will awaken. With
that mysterious power,  he  will  clear  away  malice,
reform many monsters, and make them into his  friends.
With their help, the hero will then be able  to  stand
up and face his destiny.
------------------------------------------------------

II. Gameplay Information:

Controller Usage:

 A Button
 --------
 Show Commands (Menu Button)
   While  wandering  around, pressing  the A Button
   will bring up a menu with a list of commands you
   can use.

 Enter Commands
   While in command mode, you can use the A button
   to enter the chosen command.

 Advance Conversation
   Also, if a down arrow appears during a
   conversation, push the A button to continue
   listening.


 B Button
 --------
 Cancel Commands
   Use the B Button to close the command menu
   without choosing an option, or to answer "No"
   to a Yes/No question.

 X Button
 --------
 Auto Act
  Press the X button to have the game automatically
  choose "Talk," "Door," or "Search" depending on
  what you are facing!


 L Button
 --------
 Performs the same function as X


 R Button
 --------
 Performs the same function as X


 Start Button
 ------------
 This button is not used in the game.


 Select Button
 -------------
 This button is not used in the game.


 Y Button
 --------
 This button is not used in the game.


Adventure Logs:

Because  you  are undertaking a long arduous journey,
you   will  surely  find  the  need  to  record  your
adventure. To record your adventure, simply stop at a
church  and  save your game.  The priest will be more
than  happy to  record your  journeys. DragonQuest  5
allows  for  you to  have  three  stored journeys.

The Monster Daycare Center

At   some  point  in  your  journeys,  you  may  find
yourself  with  more  monster friends  than  you  can
take  with  you.  The  Monster  Daycare  Center  will
gladly  take  care of  your extra monsters. There are
several Daycare Centers scattered around the world, so
be sure  to take advantage of it when you find one!

Ruida's Tavern

Just as at points you might have too many monsters to
take  with you,  you also might have more humans than
you  want. In  that case,  you may  drop them  off at
Ruida's Tavern in Granvania.

III. Translation Notes

As with any translation from one language to another,
this fan translation is not perfect. Compromises have
been  made between  accuracy and  coherency. In  some
places,  words were added, or line reworded to convey
not  only  the literal  meaning, but also the feeling
behind   the   words.  This  translation  in  no  way
embellishes  the original meaning  however,  and  you
will  not  find  excessive  cursing  for  no  reason.
A  careful and  delicate line  between coherency  and
blatant  'culturization' was  drawn  and followed  as
closely  as possible  to result in a script that I am
pretty proud of. However, I will be the first to admit
that it is far from perfect.

The  items,  monsters, spells,  and equipment were all
converted  to  Dragon  Warrior standards,  and in  all
places possible, a name that we felt would have suited
a Dragon Warrior game was used. This has resulted in a
few   compromises  between   direct  translation   or
romanization and what is present in the game. However,
for the space alotted for monster names, and the high
standard  of  Dragon Warrior to  live up to, what was
done was what was needed to be done.

As  you  have probably  noticed,  there  have been  a
great  number  of assembly code modifications done to
this  game.  Dark Force  has taken  great care to add
such traditional Dragon Warrior features as two  line
items and 8 character names, as  well  as  performing
menu expansion so that the full words could be fit in.
In all areas  of   the   game,  his   hard  work  and
dedication  show through,  and  I  believe that  this
translation  is truly  a masterpiece  because of  the
exquisite job he did.

IV. Credits

Coordination/Programming
 - Dark Force, Neil_

Dialogue Translations
 - Nan, Seiichi

8x8 Translations - maht, awj, Gema2k, Justinffx,
                   Moose-kun, Muumuu, Unafarmer,

Script Editors - Geechyguy, /33/, awj, Neil_, DarkForce

V. Special Thanks

Special thanks go out to Lord Tech for his gracious
assistance in locating a decent Dialogue Font and
his help in executing a few assembly hacks. He is
a gentleman as well as a scholor to quote an old
professor of mine.

VI. Thanks

The  DragonQuest  5 team  would like  to thank all of
those  who  have supported this and other DragonQuest
translation  projects as well as those involved in fan
translations of any type.

Neil_ specificly would like to thank everyone involved
in this project, especially Dark Force, Nan, and  AWJ,
As well as others who didn't participate in this project
but offered much needed words of support and encouragement:
Nightcrawler, Dinesquick, Bongo, Kueller, Magimoogle,
satsu, Sir Dragoon, zHeights, and the now missing in
action Xeur. Thanks also go out to the members of
#romhaven and #romhack on dalnet for moral support,
particularly Ultraright, Flobby, and the aforementioned
Drakkhen. Many thanks to Tom Servo for the temporary
use of his WildCard DX which has been put to great use
beta testing, checking fonts, and procrastinating.

Dark Force would specifically like to thank Jigsaw, Vimm,
Spinner 8, PlayTone, Opoth, Jason Li, Drahkken, J3d! and zsKnight
for their great help with beta testing and moral support.
